 # Consolidation/Exit Ticket - OPTION B

## Fail
Within this last module my biggest fail was a continuation of my main fail for the end of module 2. Like at the end of module 2 in that consolidation I said that I wasn't able to stick to what I said I was going to change moving forward from the first consolidation. I said I was going to allot more time for the readings each week, spreading them across the week instead of leaving them for the weekend/late in the week. But I ended up not being able to change the habit of leaving them go late. Although this is what I consider my biggest fail because I wasn't able to change my habit I still think that it was in part a win. While doing the readings each week I was still able to get a strong connection to the material and connect it to each weeks exercise to see how it can affect it in the bigger picture. 

I think one of my favourite aspects of the course was the fails. Specifically, really honing in on learning how to fail gloriously. Throughout the course, as expected, there were exercises that I had a hard time understanding and would fail the first time at. But by the end of the course I really learned to not let a fail stop me; I would readjust my expectations and let the necessary fails guide me to the final product with the greatest understanding I could have. 

## Win
 The first win I think of for this third module is the hieroglyphics. I consider this a win because I was able to learn a new tool, something that I don't doubt I will be able to use in the future. I was able to understand all of the steps; filling in the hieroglyph, erasing the unwanted spots, classifying the glyph with the matching one, and translating it. It is such an interesting tool. It can give archaeologists an all-in-one type tool that generates suggestions for translations but also a way that stores the hieroglyph where you can see the original and the altered version. I can see how this is such a good collaboration tool between humans and machines to teach the machines to automatically decipher hieroglyphs. 
 
 Another win I think of for this third module is the Static Websites. I was able to understand and create a new github.io repo, add the code to a index.md file, change the theme, I added another header to the code. As it was mentioned that week, building a website from scratch is onerous, and you don't know the security risks of clicking onto one of those self made sites. But github/jekyll is the perfect middle man, and I can only imagine how great it is for collaboration. Its text files are perfect for group collaboration; they can be edited, rearranged, reorganized, turned into something else so easily, and then uploaded right back up to be a functioning static website. Doing this exercise showed me how easy and hassle free collaboration can be. 
 
 When I think of my overall wins, one of the things I think about is learning to delegate. At the start of the course I was doing all 3 exercises for the week. I was spending more time on things than I should have. But as the semester was going on I realized I could be getting more out of the exercises if I picked 1 or 2 and really focused on those, and had a deep understanding of them. By the end of the semester I was picking an exercises spending time understanding every aspect of it, situating it within the readings and questions to reflect on, and then moving onto another one, and not putting pressure on myself if I couldn't do more than 1. This aspect of having a hard time just picking and understanding 1 or 2 was what I wrote for my most challenging thing for the consolidation 2, and was something I worked on and was comfortable by the end. 
 
## Challenges
When I was deciding what to put as my most challenging aspect of this last module/the overall course I was going to put a challenge I faced with one of the exercises, but when I thought about it, that wasn't what I found most challenging. What I really found most challenging was what we were learning; not that it was hard to do but that it was at times emotionally challenging. Each week we learned about something that archaeologists are facing or those being commemorated have been/are facing. For example, all I have learned about ethics and archaeology and the lack of diversity of different races, cultures, and even genders. In week 10 the quote I picked for my resonance was, "Still, many digital archaeology and heritage researchers have either apparently neglected to explicitly address ethical considerations in their publications, or state that they rely on their institution's or funder's research ethics governance committees for support when dealing with digital data". Something like ethics you just assume that people are taking it into consideration when doing their work, but when you really think about it and learn about it you realize it hasnt and still isnt as automatic as it should be. When I think back to the start of the course, the graveyard activity was really a big factor in myself realizing the emotion behind archaeology, at least the emotion that should be in it. I remember after I went to the graveyard the first time I went home and did research on the people whos graves I was recording so I could learn about them, and when I went back to the graveyard it was such an interesting feeling seeing the graves and knowing personal facts about them, making them more human, more alive. In my week-3-journal I wrote, "For example, i know that Cptn Moberly had six sons and three daughters, but his daughter Sophia died in infancy and is the only child who is commemorated on her fathers grave. Or that there is a grave where Robert drowned in Lake Huron in 1913 around the age of 60 and on the same monument William drowned six years after him in Lake Ontario in 1919 around the age of 30; although im not sure if they were brothers or father and son. Or that theres a grave dedicated to David Burke who went missing overseas in 1944. I can easily see why this work can affect you emotionally. I know this work gives me a new perspective of seeing graveyards". It also allowed me to look at the material not just as pictures and activities but as if it were alive, and this was emotionally challenging...in the best way. It was challenging to learn things like, in the UK 99.2% of paid archaeology staff and 97% of volunteers identify as white (Sapiens) and that they are the ones that have been coming up with the recording tools and somethings will be lost forever, or even something like children being forgotten about. This makes me wonder what has been missed along the way because of this, what evidence has been lost forever becuase other backgrounds werent involved in the research and documenting. Like the sapiens articled mentions, "Who archaeologists are -- our backgrounds, expereinces, and mental models -- can shape which quesstions we ask and how we interpret archaeological evidence". This lack of diversity changes how the past is remembered. On this quote Mifra annotated "It is essential that there is more diversity to support minorities so that their stories and past experiences are also heard especially if it involves them", and sambhullar2001 annotated "Looking at history through a "colonizers" POV will almost certainly force the voices of the oppressed to be lost". These two annotations support this implication of being underrepresented in the field having lasting effects.
-   White, William and Catherine Draycott. 2020 Why the Whiteness of Archaeology Is a Problem. SAPIENS
-   Baxter, Jane Eva. 2020. Emotional Practice and Emotional Archaeology- A Perspective from the Archaeology of Childhood in Kisha Supernant, Jane Eva Baxter, Natasha Lyons, Sonya Atalay (eds). Archaeologies of the Heart, Springer, Cham.
 

## Implications?
Learning about digital archaeology has brought forth a lot of different implications for many different reasons. Each article each week has brought light to different aspects of archaeology that might have bias or things that might unintentionally be looked over.

For example in week 5 we looked at the 'what gets counted counts' article. This week we learned to be aware about the way recording is done and the conditioning that is involved in simple things. This article mentions that once a system is in place, it becomes just 'the way things are'. I think a lot of recording tools were made a long time ago and like the article said they just stay the way they are, and are not updated with the changing times. I know for myself and I noticed that week that someone else also commented on this in an annotation that many of us assume the gender of the name on each headstone. Some headstones dont have wording such as "his wife" and are just two names and it is easy to assume they are husband and wife if one is 'masculine' and one is 'feminine'. Something like this allowed me to be aware that those who do not fit into the binary options do not get counted in the data, and because of this we will just never know or be able to find any data that would be able to tell us these answers
-   ‘What gets counted, counts’. Chapter from Data Feminism by Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren Klein

Since the second module another thing we looked at was archaeogaming. That week I picked the game Left 4 Dead. There is a graveyard in the game called 'Saint Roches Cemetary' it is modeled after the 'Saint Roch's Cemetary' in New Orleans. That week I read through the No Man's Sky Archaeological Survey Code of Ethics and I thought it was very interesting. They made the series of ethical guidelines to follow, just like how you **_should_** be doing it in person. They mention in the 'brief' principles, basically, you should be walking around the game acting as _normal_ as you possibly can without hurting anyone, messing up any of the world, not interfering with society, and you can only act against someone/something else if it is in self defense. After reading through them, they all make sense as to why you should be following them. When I first saw archaeogaming I didn't even really think about ethics because it is "just a game" but when you think about it, especially in Left 4 Dead, since it is modeled after a real place, with real graves, real people, real cultures and memories. So treating it like a real graveyard while surveying it makes a lot of sense. Since this is a relatively new aspect of digital archaeology I wonder what it will be like in the years to come, if there will be digital excavation sites that happen. 

The further we got into the course the more I realized that one of, if not the most important aspects of doing archaeology, is the ethics and making sure the person and their culture is respected. As talked about before in class, in order to preserve, archaeology has to be destroyed.  

## Previous Feedback
One of the things mentioned in my week 10 feedback was about thinking about what happens when tasks start to make us share authority with the machines. This makes me think back to week 7 where one of the implications I notices was digital archaeology being completely digital. In the article 'Living a semi-digital kinda life' it says "It is a misconception to think that because we have thousands of images we have captured all of the data necessary both to reconstruct and to answer questions about the past". I think this is very relevant when looking at these 'future archaeologists'. We are currently living in a digital age and have digital lives, there is no way around it and all of these new generations are being raised with it. I think it already is taking over all fields of work. But I dont think it is ethically enough to do work like archaeology completely digital. When comparing this to the work we have done in the class, I am glad we started off with the graveyard exercise because I think that it allowed everyone to understand the personal effects of doing this work; making it personal instead of just something you see on a screen. As someone annotated in this article "no method of data collection is perfect and one should not just rely on technology to make it complete"; yes technology can do the job but the question is should technology be doing the job? Based on all the implication we have learned about this module and last module I think it is safe to say that archaeology already has enough problems without technology and having technology take all of the emotion out of it might not be the best idea.
-   Kersel, Morag. 2016. ‘Living a Semi-digital Kinda Life’ in Erin Walcek Averett, Jody Michael Gordon, and Derek B. Counts (eds) _Mobilizing the Past for a Digital Future: The Potential of Digital Archaeology_. Grand Forks: The Digital Press at the University of North Dakota. pp. 475-492.

In week 12 the feedback that got me thinking was about the archaeogaming. Until you mentioned it in my feedback I never thought about there being a whole _literal_ digital archaeology in these games. Games _usually_ save your progress when you pass levels and move forward, so all the monuments you destroy and things you blow up and knock over are just left there. And if you dont touch the game for a long time or go to that part of the level, its just left there to break apart; it is so interesting to think about. 
Another thing mentioned in my feedback was about how I talked about my Holocaust exhibit example and storytelling with archaeology. You mentioned how archaeology backed away from 'storytelling' in the 60s, 70s, and is partly why pseudoarchaeology is now rife, that it offers enchantment without ethics and archaeology offered ethics without enchantment. This is fascinating to me; I love a good story, I like watching what crazy conspiracies people can put out, or watching/reading a good fiction story, but at the end of it I don't use it as the truth, I can decipher between the two, which is something the average person won't do. I did a bit of google searching just to see what archaeologists had to say on pseudoarchaeology, and I never realized the level of harm it could cause. The basic gist I got was that no one thinks it can't entertain, because it definitely can, but that it is explaining the past by a resort to the irrational, it is taking a belief in something and picking and choosing already assembled data to explain it. It makes me think of this one girl on tiktok who believes with her whole being that Rome didn't exist and tries to prove that it was completely fabricated along with Latin, all the architecture, coinage, etc. 

## Overall Evolution 
I really really liked the layout of this course. I am in my fourth year and I have never felt so connected to the material as I have throughout the semester with this course. Going into this course I was worried when I saw that it was 'digital', I am not very techy with the under the surface aspects of technology, but my favourite thing to do is learn new things. When I started I knew *nothing* about code, like absolutely nothing; when I thought of code before this class I thought of hackers in tv shows and movies and the big black screen with green text flying across it. And now I can't believe how much I learned, how comfortable I am with it. I am now able to look at script and understand it and edit it, I understand python and Rstudio, and markup on github. 

It makes me think back to one of the first exercises we did in the course in week 3, the Webmaps. That was the first time I had ever brought python up on my laptop, I had no idea what it was or what it did or what it could do. I remember having trouble that week with it; no matter what I did nothing would show up on my browser. This was also the start of me really understanding what it means to have a glorious failure. I was failing so many times, I would try for a while and when it didn't work I would close it and try again later. I was able to put my code into sublime, but I couldn't figure out pythons commands. This was also the start of my collaboration and truly understanding that there isn't shame in asking for help. I remember calling my friend who is in civil engineering who took a python course; and just bouncing ideas off him to what was going wrong, and I watched some youtube videos and *finally* figured out I just needed to alter the code a bit to take me to the local host. I found for myself that the $ python -m http.server didnt work, and I found that putting in 'ls' and then putting in 'python -m SimpleHTTPServer' gave me the message that the server was running at 8000, then i put 'Localhost:8000' into my browser and it worked. I remember feeling very accomplished this week and excited to try the next exercises. 

I remember when the course first started, Obsidian was daunting to me, and now its one of my favourite apps. It is such a great app. It is the most convenient and neat way of doing your work. For the rest of my classes I use microsoft word for notes and assignments and it is so messy compared to Obsidian. Having everything in one file, all laid out, being able to switch between different weeks of journals and notes is great. It is definitely going to be something I use for a long time I think. Same goes for Github, it was also daunting to me and now I just want to play around in it. It is so interesting, I can't get over how it is the perfect middle man, reading script and making servers and it is *such* a great collaboration tool. 

## Collaboration
The collaboration aspect of this course was really nice. I think it would be hard to get through this course if you solely relied on yourself and your own thoughts. Each week being able to see what others annotated on the articles was very helpful and allowed me to see certain parts of the article that I might have skimmed over otherwise. It was nice that I had a friend in civil engineering who I could bonce ideas off of, its always nice when you can think out loud to someone so they can see what you might be missing. It was also very helpful to be in the class discord. There were quite a few times that someone would post something that might have gone wrong for them in an exercise and then someone would post a solution which would be so helpful for myself, knowing where the problem was I could keep an eye out for it. It was also interesting to be able to see the collaborative graveyard data from all over (and also to see how many christian graveyards there really is). This course lets you not only feel connected to the material but to your classmates even though its all online. 


## Changes I'm making moving forward
This course has been structured so differently compared to my other classes, and for the better. When I think back over the content it doesn't feel like I was simply learning, I was *understanding* and connecting to the material. Each week what we were reading and doing was thought provoking to me, it left me thinking and wondering and wanting to ask questions; I will give an example. In one of my other courses we did a discussion post every week where you had to talk a bit about the material that week and then pose a question you couldn't answer with the material. And in the last week of class one of the things we looked at was the fall of Antony and Cleopatra. Very briefly in that weeks lecture it was mentioned about Antony and Cleopatras children and how Octavia was given them. When I heard this the first thing I thought of was this course back in week 3 when we read the "Emotional Practice and Emotional Archaeology" article. The children were my resonance quote for that week, I said, "I find it interesting that children arent more of a focal point since they made up such a huge part of deaths until recently...It would still be interesting to hear about what the families felt like after loosing a child". I thought about this when I was learning about Antonys and Cleopatras children; I already am possibly too much of an empath and by that point I learned how to look at antiquity with more empathy from this course. So when I heard that Antonys oldest son (Antyllus) who he had with Fulvia was killed by Octavian the first thing I thought about was Octavia and how at that point she was raising Antony and Fulvias children as her own, he had nothing to do with Antony he was only about 8. I thought about Octavia and what she wouldve thought about her brother killing this son of hers and how she would've felt being given Antony and Cleopatras children to raise, the man who left her for Cleopatra, and didnt recognize their own children together. This class helped me to think of these things, how we will never know because no one found it important, how Octavias feelings never really mattered, she was raising about 5 children of Antonys past lovers and history was written to make it seem like she was fine with it; id love to know how she really felt. 
(ps I ended up getting 125% on this discussion post and it in part because of this course helping me look out for the little guys that get forgotten)

To go along with this, it was also interesting to see what others wrote about in that class for discussions. This course has really engraved in my mind this sense of looking at history with empathy and ethics and the small details that people leave out. In my other class I found the majority of people focusing their discussion posts on the battles and the men and power; whereas I found myself to be one of the only ones discussing the not so typical, yaknow men in power type; I found myself looking at adoption and women and children and the people affected by taxes (tithe). And I owe credit to this class helping me see these things that are forgotten about and constantly overlooked, and it will be something that I take with me in my career and I will hold dear. It is also something I wish I learned in depth about earlier in my undergraduate, how different I could have been looking at material, but it is **definitely** better late than never. 

This course allowed me to see archaeology from a different light, and it is something I will be forever greatful for.  
